So up to this point,
we've talked about classes,
we've talked about inheritance of classes,
a really important topic to cover.
So we're gonna talk about probably
the most important implementation
of inheritance in C#,
which is what's called an interface.
So an interface is essentially, think of
it like a micro abstract class with no
inheritance hierarchy, you can actually
inherit from other interfaces, which
we'll talk about, but it's essentially
not a class at all, it's a contract.
And what I mean by that is that it's
something that says we're gonna
define a specific aspect of behavior
that you have to implement, but
we're not gonna be opinionated
about how you implement it.
Let's take this IDatabase.
So first of all naming convention,
interfaces are named
always in Pascal case and
always prefixed by an I.
That's an important part of interfaces
to know, when you see I something,
unless it's a full word that starts with
I, you should think immediately interface.
So let's take this example for instance.
So in the real world,
in the programming world,
there's dozens of different ways and
different means of connecting, or
there's dozens of different database
products that exist in the market.
SQL Server is one that's Microsoft's,
Postgres is another,
there's Oracle,
there's a huge ton of them.
I mainly use SQL Server and Postgres.
And between those two systems,
they are different database systems,
they have similar but
different authentication requirements,
they have similar but different ways
of communicating with those databases.
So what this interface is meant
to define is that we know that
we wanna connect to a database,
and we know we wanna be able
to disconnect to the database,
but how we do that is up to you.
Inheritance, first of all,
why use interfaces at all?
First of all, multiple inheritance is not
a thing, if I flip it back to my code, and
for instance, I define a,
skip this back to a state, there we go.
And I define a separate robot class.
I can't have an hourly employee
that inherits from a robot and
an employee, so
multiple inheritance just does not exist.
C#, however, has interfaces to allow you
to kind of get multiple inheritance,
it's essentially,
it's what's called implementation.
Instead of inheriting from an object,
you implement an interface.
So it allows us to have a lot of
the similar functionality as multiple
interfaces without all of the problems
that comes with multiple inheritance.
They also emphasize composability, so
it essentially allows you to take
an object and give it a few different
behaviors that may be important to other
objects in the world that you've created.
And this promotes a flexible
kind of modular code design,
and it makes it easy to extend and
change code.
And understanding interfaces is
really crucial to understanding how,
especially when we get to
the ASP.NET Core course,
interfaces become especially important to
understand because they're everywhere.
So, I think that the main thing is that
they provide no behaviors by default,
they're basically saying, I need you
to implement this behavior for me.
It's wanting to tell you about how
a contract should be filled, but
not how a contract should be fulfilled,
it does not wanna tell you how to do it,
doesn't wanna tell you how to do your job.
So you can think of classes
as defining the behaviors and
the properties of the thing, and
interfaces define the thing's shape,
general shape,
without opinions about the behavior.
It may define properties, it may define
methods, it just depends on the interface.
So an interface is declared
very simply by instead of
public class, you have public interface.
And then you have the name of the
interface, again, usually prefixed with I.
You can declare them without the I,
but C# is going to tell you now
you really should do that and provide
a link to documentation explaining why.
For consistency, prefix it with an I.
And you're gonna see that there's no
behaviors, there's no compiler, errors,
there's no warnings.
It's because we've simply defined
this interface by itself, and
we've done it in a way that
C# is totally okay with.
You can define an interface and then not
use it and give it no behaviors, but
the moment you implement that interface
on a class is when it becomes important.
So let me show you kind of what
that would look like in a very,
it's a little bit contrived,
but it will work.
So if we have a SqlDatabase.
So let's call this a SqlServerDatabase,
and we'll even
call it MicrosoftSqlServer, just to say
that this is a separate product, right?
I'm gonna go ahead and
delete the implementation.
First thing you're gonna see is that
we get a little squiggles, it says,
this doesn't implement this interface
member, it doesn't implement connect,
disconnect, or is connected.
You're forced to declare all three or
else you will get a compiler error.
So this is where the different
behavior comes in, right?
So you have a class that is the way
that we connect to MicrosoftSqlServer,
but again, it's different than
the way that we would do if we
were declaring a PostgresDatabase,
that implements IDatabase.
It's gonna have a totally
different set of, like I said,
authentication or negotiation about how to
connect and how to send and receive data.
They're gonna be different because
they're different database systems.
So it's gonna want you to fulfill
this contract as well same as that.
I'm gonna use my tooling to do it, so
command., and I'm gonna say implement
interface, and you're gonna see that
it's going to kind of implement it.
It's gonna just define the structure,
but it's also gonna say, hey,
we're gonna throw a bunch of not
implemented exceptions to say
you need to fill in these parts of it.
So we'll go ahead and
do that real quick, same as below.
And so this might be
Console.WriteLine Connected to Postgres.
Let's pretend this is
a Postgres connection.
Do the same thing down here, boom.
Disconnected from Postgres, okay?
So again, abstract class.
When you inherit from a class,
it's called inheriting from it,
when you implement an interface,
you're implementing it.
A couple of things to note, C#,
they introduced something called
default implementations in interfaces.
Which is a behavior that's kind of one of
those mind pretzel things that I saw and
my eyes crossed.
It's not something that I do ever and
that's because that's really
not the point of an interface.
These have a very,
very narrow use case, but in theory,
you can give a interface
now a default behavior and
then not force the implementing class
to actually override that behavior.
So you could say Console.WriteLine,
why does this exist?
This is one of those features of C#
that I simply just don't agree with, and
I don't agree with it because interfaces
are meant to be kind of a clean contract.
Just implement this behavior and
we're good.
So Spencer doesn't use them,
there's my little spicy take, and I don't,
I just haven't seen them in the wild,
I think most people respect interfaces for
what they're meant to be.
A couple of other kinda notes,
kind of curiosities if you will, so
there's what's called
a static abstract method.
And so what this is, essentially,
is you can define a static method
in a implementing class, you can force
that class to define a static method.
Again, something that is
a very narrow use case, and
actually is slightly more useful in my
opinion, than default implementations.
I have not written one of these in real
life, I will say that I'm showing it
to you so that you can kinda understand
that this is a syntax that exists,
but in the real world,
I say it's used pretty sparingly.
I'm sure it's used some places,
I haven't used one yet.
So it exists, this essentially says,
hey, derived class,
create a method that does this thing,
but it's a static method.
So it's not actually part of that,
the behavior of an instance of that class,
so it's a little odd, but it does exist.
There's a couple of big use cases for
interfaces.
So for a service-based architecture,
and in the ASP.NET Core course, when
we get to talk about dependency injection,
this is gonna become a big topic.
It will start to kind of put
together why this is important.
But service-based architectures
that include dependency injection,
make interfaces really important to use.
They can also be used to mark classes,
you can have an empty
interface that just simply marks
a class as having that interface.
Which doesn't sound useful because you're
not providing any specific behaviors,
you're not providing specific properties.
But some frameworks can see that marker
and then perform different behaviors on
that object downstream based on
just the presence of that marker.
That's a more of an advanced case,
most of the time interfaces
are gonna have behaviors and
properties that the implementing
class is gonna want to implement.
But this is a thing that I do and
in the ASP.NET Core course,
we'll see a sort of example of this.
I use interfaces,
I don't necessarily think of them
as a way to avoid inheritance.
But it is a way of kind of providing
multiple behaviors to a class
without trying to inherit from a class
that might have a couple of behaviors and
then implement it and then inherit
from a class that does the same thing.
That also doesn't mean that you want
a class that implements ten interfaces.
There may be a use for that, but
most of my classes are gonna implement no
more than one, maybe two,
in most of the code that I write.
There are some times where
there are exceptions.
If I want that IEquatable interface
where I wanna be able to say,
hey, I need to be able to compare
this monkey to this human, okay?
So I need to implement that interface in
order to provide a strongly typed way of
doing that, there's reasons to do it.
But for the most part, I typically just do
an interface to define the contract and
then the implementation
to actually do the thing.
This really also gets into testing,
which again,
we'll talk about in the ASP.NET Core
course cuz testing is a big part of that.
>> Student 1: Are there use
cases where you'd reach for
an abstract class over an interface?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes, absolutely.
Typically, I'm gonna reach for
an abstract class when I want
to define behaviors for a class.
Specifically, when I'm writing
ASP.NET Core code, I will have an abstract
class that will provide some behavior,
some component of ASP.NET Core.
And I wanna copy that to all
of the derived classes, but
do it in a way that kind of
reduces code duplication.
So absolutely, I use abstract classes
frequently, but I use interfaces more.
Good question.